Subject: Public Whip Newsletter #3 - 
 
Welcome to the third Public Whip newsletter.

Inside this issue:
* Editorial
* Site Updates: "Written Answers"
* Feature Article: "The Official Answer"
* Project Spotlight: "Real Uses"

The Public Whip ( http://www.publicwhip.org.uk ) is a project to
data-mine the record of Members of the United Kingdom Parliament, so
that you can hold them to account.

***********************************************************************
Editorial

Today's newsletter is a special edition to warm you this winter with
our new Written Answers database.  What sort of subjects has your MP
been asking about recently?  What exactly is this type of
parliamentary question?   Now with the Public Whip you can find out.
Read on.

In other news, a lone French hacker has started whipping the European
parliament.  Check out http://www.europarliament.net for everything
you ever wanted to know about how your MEP has voted and their
attendance record.  There are statistics by political group, country
and even gender.

Now, which major world parliament has next dibs?

 - Francis, The Public Whip (http://www.publicwhip.org.uk)

***********************************************************************
Written Answers - Site Updates 

After two months of hacking, we now have a database for the year 2003
of all the House of Commons written questions and answers which is
searchable by keyword and by member.  Our source-code is freely
available in the usual place for public perusal.  

The keyword searching works from the usual Public Whip search box.
Try typing the word "Birt" into our search engine, and below the
eleven divions you will get five questions posed by Norman Baker and
Norman Lamb.  

http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/search.php?query=Birt&button=Search

Click on the title of a question to view its content, or choose "Show
contents of all these Written Answers on one large page" to see lots
of them at once.

You can view all the written questions asked or answered by your MP.
Search for your MP on the Public Whip site, select their name and then
choose "Written Answers".

http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/mp.php?id=uk.org.publicwhip/member/693#wrans

Some answers refer the honourable member to an answer that was given
to another question.  We have tried to generate the links to them
where possible.  This is a difficult feature since it requires the
computer to interpret the english language, and some of the column
references are numerically wrong.  We could do something about their
software if they gave us a chance." 

***********************************************************************
The Official Answer - Feature Article 

Just after the state opening of Parliament we at Public Whip looked
carefully at what we had achieved.  We had extracted from the online
Hansard documents all the voting records of the divisions made by our
representative MPs to find out exactly how they were behaving.
Superficially it seemed that votes in the division lobbies were the
only thing that counted.  It is the decisive act.  Indeed, due to the
existence of the Division Bell  -- which saves them the inconvenience
of actually sitting through the debate before the vote -- we were
confident of that nothing else that went on was of any consequence.  

Obviously this is a great simplification.  The votes mean a lot less
than we thought they'd mean because MPs, on the whole, do what they
are told by the party whips.  We suspect that a great deal of
important stuff does go on in the debating chamber, with parts of the
story spreading across into the committees and into other places, but
we have no clear way to compile it, as we did with the voting record.
However, from within all that confusion of information, there is one
small area that does appear to have the structure and consistency
necessary to attempt automation: The Parliamentary Written Answers.  

Each Parliamentary Written Answer begins with a member writing a
sentence that starts with: "To ask the [person in government]
whether/when/if/why/... ".  And then one of the ministers makes one
reply giving the facts requested -- the official position -- or makes
some other irrelevant statement.  The structure is simple and
reliable.  It's like a disjoint fragment of an interview with a
politician that can be taken out of context.  

As an item of active political text, the Parliamentary Written Answers
are practically unique.  Any MP can choose to pose a difficult and
perceptive question on any subject without having to "catch the
Speaker's eye" at the right time.  There are occasions when the
question solicits information that's restricted by the Official
Secrets Act (government information which can only be released on the
authority of a minister, so only a minister can say it).  

http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/wrans.php?search=terrorism+act+applications&expand=yes

Sometimes the answers provide genuinely new information, although it
isn't always accurate or complete.  For example, here are two
questions from the middle of last year about the national DNA
database.  One says that 95 per cent of individuals on the database
have a criminal conviction.  The other answer contradicts this,
stating that the database does not store information about individual
convictions.

http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/wrans.php?id=uk.org.publicwhip/wrans/2003-04-08.208W.6
http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/wrans.php?id=uk.org.publicwhip/wrans/2003-07-17.595W.4

We are all aware of the tactics politicians use to not answer the
question in a live political interview (waffling, stating the obvious,
mis-representing the question, saying something completely different)
until the time has run out.  

Since Written Answers have no time limit and the responses must be
considered (since the questions are given long in advance), there is a
completely different set of techniques to avoid giving the relevant
answer.  We hope you enjoy discovering them for yourself as you surf
through the database.  

The flaw in the PWQ system is that the people who answer these
questions are part of the political process -- the government --
rather than being independent civil servants with a duty to provide
information to those who need it in order to properly scrutinize the
workings of the government.  If someone drafts an answer that lets out
politically damaging information, they are responsible for it
reflecting badly on themselves.  So good questions don't tend to get
answered.  

Indeed, if the usual techniques of not answering the question don't
work, one can always pretend it was never asked.  

http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/search.php?query=unanswered+questions&button=Search

Maybe there's good stuff in the unanswered questions section when we
get round to it.   Development is an ongoing process, constantly
looking for where to get the most bang.  

***********************************************************************
Real Uses - Project Spotlight

"Galloway attends fewest votes in last Commons session" - at the start
of the new year, the Independent newspaper ran an article about MP
voting attendance in 2003.  It's entirely based on Public Whip data,
which you can find on a special page here:
http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/mps.php?session=2002&sort=attendance

Unfortunately, you have to subscribe to read the Independent article
online, or you could dig out the 2 January paper copy from your
cupboard.
http://news.independent.co.uk/uk/politics/story.jsp?story=477390

Last week, Julian and I gave a talk and demonstration of Public Whip
at the House of Lords.  It was to the Forum for Stable Currencies, and
we had great fun answering questions about how the internet and
software can improve scrutiny of MPs.  Would you like us to give a
talk to your organisation?  Email francis@publicwhip.org.uk to arrange
it.

What have you used Public Whip for?  We always love to have feedback
if you've been, say, using Public Whip to watch how a Scottish MP
really votes on English issues and writing articles about it in a
major newspaper.  Just as an example.  Let us know what you're up to,
maybe we can help you more.  Mail: support@publicwhip.org.uk

***********************************************************************
Friend who would like this?  Forward it to them now!
***********************************************************************

Subscribe a new address to this newsletter? Sign up here.
http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/account/register.php

Want to stop getting this newsletter? Login here and cancel your
subscription. http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/account/settings.php
