Subject: Public Whip Newsletter #2 - 
   
Welcome to the second Public Whip newsletter! 

Inside this issue:
* Editorial
* Feature Article: "Open Software, Open Standards"
* Site Updates: ""
* Project Spotlight: ""

***********************************************************************
Editorial


 - Francis, The Public Whip (http://www.publicwhip.org.uk)

Guest Issue - Iraq
Call for other guest issues

***********************************************************************
Open Software, Open Standards - Feature Article by Francis

When public affairs people first see the Public Whip they often ask how
it was made so quickly and efficiently. How can it exist when there is
no company backing it, or government funding it? It appears like magic
from thin air. 

Of course it isn't magic, just the tip of something new. There is a
large infrastructure behind it, invisible to most until now. This
infrastructure has only recently grown to the point where "civic
hacking" is possible. Yes, this is partly cheap PC hardware, and
increasing access to the internet. But it is also about the software,
and about standards.

Software is a special business because its product can be reproduced at 
almost no cost after it has been made. This is a natural property of
information, and one that the market is only just beginning to exploit.
Only art forms such as music are comparable, and as you may have read
that industry is going through massive upheaval.  Software is too.

Most software that you've used probably relies on "intellectual
property" laws to make itself illegal to copy. This contradicts its
nature, but it allows people to invest capital in software, and build
their computer businesses. That is the old way to run a software
company. 

The new way is to create some software that your business needs or that
your client pays you for, and then give it and its blueprints ("source
code") away. This has no cost to you, and lets anyone else in the world
copy it and improve it.  Moreover, you get the improvements back again!
Any academic, any student or any professional programmer can use and add
to the software, sharing it and forming a community. Nobody owns it.

Public Whip relies on a sledge load of this "open source" software. I
can list the jargon names - Linux (an operating system), Perl (a programming
language), PHP (a website scripting language), MySQL (a database),
Octave (a statistics package) - but all you need to know is that they
are high quality tools for a computer programmer. With the best possible
customer support in the form of peers who helped create it.

So that's the first thing the mystified public affairs worker didn't
know - that "open source" software is now very very good. But all this
would be for nothing if the internet wasn't built on standards. It's
an old problem, which happened once before in the heat of the industrial
revolution.

In mid-nineteenth century Britain there was a crazy inefficiency. Every
factory and manufacturer had their own design of screw thread. This
meant that special custom fasteners often had to be made, and companies
couldn't exchange many tools and materials. An engineer, Sir Joseph
Whitworth, set out to solve the problem. He championed a standard
screw thread, which was taken up by many manufacturers, and eventually
adopted by the British Standards Institute.

The same thing happened at the end of the twentieth century with
information technology.  In the early 1990s computer companies were
fighting each other to dominate the world with their own proprietary
networking system. If one had won, Public Whip would have been much
harder to do and wouldn't have happened.

Luckily, sense was seen, and the Internet was adopted as a standard.
The Hansard web site is served using a globally agreed network protocol
(HTTP), and using a globally agreed file format (HTML).  Just like the
standard screw threads, IT standards are incredibly enabling.  As well
as letting data be used in flexible ways, they prevent vendor lock in,
improving market competition.

The battle isn't won yet, standards have to be constantly championed.
Take a look at the parliamentary live internet video broadcasts. You can
find them at http://www.parliamentlive.tv/.  They are broadcast only in
Windows Media Player format. This is a closed format, owned by
Microsoft, which nobody else can make software to create or play. On
a selfish note, this means that I can't view broadcasts of my democratic
representatives, as I happen to not use software made by Microsoft. But
there is a problem even for the majority who use Windows.

It means that nobody can ever make something like Public Whip for
parliamentary video. If the video was open, somebody could record it and
provide MP3 audio downloads of individual speeches. But that isn't
possible while the broadcasts are in a non standard format, that can't
screw into anything else.

So that's the second thing that has enabled Public Whip to appear as if
by magic.  Open protocols and open formats untie the internet, and
ultimately make it much more useful.

***********************************************************************
- Site Updates by Francis

Public Whip now counts "tellers".  At each division

***********************************************************************
- Project Spotlight by Francis

Ask people what they would like from the site (get B to help word this)

Mention guy who has posted to Hansard list

Send me an email, francis@publicwhip.org.uk, if you would like to help
out and have any questions!

***********************************************************************
See you again soon... Why not forward this now to a friend?
***********************************************************************

Subscribe a new address to this newsletter? Sign up here.
http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/account/register.php

Want to stop getting this newsletter? Login here and cancel your
subscription. http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/account/settings.php
